[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Jonny Enoch, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
If I mentioned Pythagoras
to most of you,
you'd probably
start thinking back
to when you were in
math class in school
and learned about
Pythagoras' theorem,
or a squared plus b
squared equals c squared.
That's when you
have a triangle that
has a 90-degree or right
angle, and you make squares
on each side of
those three sides.
Then we discover that
the largest square
has an identical sized area
to the other squares combined.
But Pythagoras was much
more than a mathematician.
He was a mathemagician,
or an esotericist
and a great thinker.
So for those reasons,
we will be talking
very little about his math
skills on this episode,
and more about his profound
wisdom and teachings.
Pythagoras lived
between 570 and 495 BCE,
and is regarded today
as a Greek philosopher
and founder of Pythagoreanism.
Well before he established his
first Pythagorean community,
he was already known as
a great mathematician.
Without a doubt, Pythagoras was
one of the most intelligent men
of his time.
In fact, his views
and philosophies
influenced other
great philosophers,
like Plato and Aristotle.
In truth, he is said to
have greatly affected
Western thought.
He established his now
famous school at Crotone
in the South of
Italy about 529 BCE.
And in a short period
of time, disciples
flocked to him from all
over Greece, and even Italy.
Pythagoras centered many of his
teachings around mathematics.
However, he also taught
the spiritual philosophies
of metempsychosis, or
the passing of the soul
after death into
another body, as well as
divination and magic, a practice
he picked up in his Magi
training in Babylon.
Perhaps not known to
many people today,
he was a strong believer
in reincarnation,
as this was a topic he
discussed at great length
with his students.
He was also a firm believer in
the mystical power of numbers.
As a geometrician, which
is an expert on geometry,
he was said to have invented
several math problems, most
notably the 47th
problem of Euclid,
which is a symbol
well-respected in the mysteries.
Another area of
interest to him was
the mathematical
relationship to music.
Once again, this is
another key component
of the mystery schools.
Nevertheless, Pythagoras
disdained many of the sages
from his time period.
He considered them vain
and overly dogmatic
in their lifestyle
and instructions.
As a result, he simply
proclaimed himself as a seeker
after knowledge, not
the possessor of it.
This new way of thinking
took everyone by surprise.
He was simply a lover of
wisdom, and willingly shared it
with anyone who
joined his school.
In order to become a
member of his order,
disciples had to wear the
simplest kinds of clothing.
They also had to surrender
all individual property
upon arrival.
This was followed by living
three years in poverty.
And they had to adhere
to rigorous silence.
Likewise, although
vegetarianism was encouraged,
meat eating was allowed,
although minimally.
Pythagoras believed
that when you ate meat,
it clouded your judgment.
He also taught his
followers that friendship
was the truest and most
perfect of relationships.
There were two types
of studies he offered,
esoteric and exoteric.
Exoteric instruction related
to general ethical teachings,
while esoteric constituted
Pythagoras' core directives
and knowledge that he
picked up in Egypt.
Pythagoras called his
students [NON-ENGLISH],,
or his companions and friends.
Much like those in
secret societies
today, the school conducted
rigorous scrutiny rituals
in order to discover
character flaws,
and also required an
oath as preparation
in its secret teachings.
Most interestingly, if
a companion of the order
decided to return to the
world, the other disciples
held a funeral for them
and left a monument
to their memory, for that person
was considered dead to them.
Nevertheless, before
he created his school,
Pythagoras traveled extensively.
Oddly enough, it all
started in his youth,
when he traveled with his
father, who was a gem merchant.
This early experience
would eventually
pay dividends for the young man.
Once his family settled
down on the island of Samos,
Pythagoras began his studies.
He first studied with the
philosopher Pherecydes,
followed by a stint with
the astronomer Thales when
he was just 18 years old.
Thales recommended that
Pythagoras travel to Egypt
to learn more of these esoteric
subjects and the mysteries.
Pythagoras was first
initiated into the Mysteries
of Tyre in Byblos before
arriving in Egypt.
But upon his arrival,
he soon discovered
that the Egyptian
mystery schools would not
admit him unless he
completed a 40-day fast.
This is similar to what
we were told in the Bible
that Jesus experienced
in the desert.
This is a well-known spiritual
purification practice, which,
according to the French
esotericist Éliphas Lévi should
only be performed
once every 50 years.
So after performing
this 40-day fast,
he was allowed to enter
the school at Diospolis.
Pythagoras was said to
have stated, "you are not
allowing Pythagoras in.
I am a different man.
I am reborn.
You were right, and I
was wrong, because then
my whole standpoint
was intellectual.
Through this purification, my
center of being has changed.
Before this training,
I could only
understand through the
intellect, through the head.
Now I can feel.
Now truth is not a concept
to me, but a life."
After this
experience, Pythagoras
spent the next 22 years
perfecting his crafts
in mathematics, music,
astronomy, magic,
and the Egyptian and
Babylonian mysteries.
Most interestingly,
Pythagoras became a prisoner
when Cambyses II, the king
of Persia, attacked Egypt.
As a detainee in Babylon,
he took the opportunity
to study from the Magi, and
was initiated into the Chaldean
mysteries.
After leaving
Babylon, he eventually
made his way through
Persia to India,
where he resumed his
education under the Brahmins.
It is said that he went
to India as a student,
but left the country
as Pitar Guru
and as Yavanacharya,
the Ionian teacher.
Sadly, because of his
travels, Pythagoras
did not return home until
he was 56 years of age.
And upon his arrival, he
discovered that his island home
was in ruin, with its
temples and schools closed
due to the oppression of the
Persian captors of the day.
Realizing he was not welcomed,
he left and went to Italy.
Incredibly, the people
were so impressed
with him and his knowledge,
they soon decided to build him
a school, which served
as a school of philosophy
and science.
This school was modeled around
the mystery schools of Egypt.
As we mentioned
earlier, his followers
lived a strict disciplinary
life in accordance
with the great mystery
schools during that time.
And there were three
levels of initiation,
just like many of our
ancient initiatory rites.
In fact, many secret
societies credit
Pythagoras for
starting their order.
According to Albert Mackey's
"Encyclopedia of Freemasonry,"
when we go back to the time of
the 16th-century king of Henry
VIII and his six
wives, we learn that he
was trying to get a divorce from
his wife, Catherine of Aragon,
because she couldn't
produce for him a male heir.
Instead, he wanted to marry the
young, pretty, and intelligent
Anne Boleyn.
But no matter what he tried,
even with the help of Cardinal
Wolsey, the Catholic
Church kept telling
him no due to political
reasons of the day that
involved her family.
So he decided to get a
divorce from the church
instead with the help of a
lawyer named Thomas Cromwell.
This incident became
very famously known
as the English Reformation.
At that time, he sent out a
man named John Leland, who
would go to all the
Catholic monasteries
and decide what books they
wanted to keep before they
burned the places down.
That is when he stumbled on a
very interesting and old book
entitled "What Are the
Origins of Freemasonry?"
And when you opened up the pages
of this dusty old manuscript,
it said inside that
their order was founded
by Peter Gower the Grecian.
In other words, this is an
Anglicization of Pythagoras.
Pythagoras taught
that the Earth was
a sphere at the center
of the universe,
and that the moon was inclined
to the Earth's equator.
Furthermore, he was one
of the first to discover
that Venus was perceived
as an evening star
and then a planet
as the morning star.
He employed music
in his instruction.
He called it "the
music of the spheres."
And this was replicated by the
use of an instrument called
a monochord.
He was also the first
to call the heavens
a universe and the Earth round.
Pythagoras taught and firmly
believed that, number one,
at its deepest level, reality
is mathematical in nature;
number two, that
philosophy can be
used for spiritual
purification; and number three,
that the soul can rise
to union with the divine;
number four, that
certain symbols have
a mystical significance;
and number five,
all members of the order
should observe strict loyalty
and secrecy.
But of course, he believed
in and taught the principles
of immortality, which include an
understanding that the soul is
immortal, which means it
changes from body to body
and reincarnations,
inevitably something
he learned from his travels
to India, Babylon, and Egypt.
Also, Pythagoras
openly discussed
how he lived numerous
past lives, one of which
was being the son of Hermes,
who is named Aethalides.
As the story goes, Hermes
promised Aethalides,
or Pythagoras, any
gift he desired,
and he chose to remember
everything after death,
which was granted to him.
Pythagoras also
believed that anyone
who could remember
their past lives
was a highly advanced soul.
Consequently,
Pythagoras recalled
all of his previous
lives thereafter,
like the time when he saw
a war shield on the wall
and remembered his
life as Euphorbus.
In this life, he was a soldier
who fought in the Trojan War.
When asked to offer proof
of his previous existences,
he told his disciples to
pull the shield down and look
for the name he
previously mentioned.
Pythagoras cried profusely
while his students
stood in amazement.
It is clear from the
teachings of Pythagoras
that he was completely familiar
with the principles of Asiatic
and Occidental esotericism.
In truth, he
traveled and studied
with many of the ancient
mystery cultures of the day,
including the
Jewish philosophers,
who we are told instructed
him in the rabbinical secret
traditions of Moses.
Some people even believe he
was a disciple of Zoroaster.
And although accounts of his
travels differ significantly,
historians for the
most part agree
that he visited many
countries and studied
at the feet of
many great masters.
There are, of course, many
legends about Pythagoras.
One of the biggest is
perhaps his own immortalism.
Many people maintain that
he was no mortal man.
In fact, they
thought of him as one
of the gods who had
taken on a human body
to enable him to come into
this world to instruct us.
In fact, Pythagoras was one of
the numerous sages and saviors
of antiquity for whom
an immaculate conception
is asserted.
In his "Anacalypsis,"
Godfrey Higgins writes,
"The first striking
circumstance in which
the history of Pythagoras
agrees with the history of Jesus
is that they were natives
of nearly the same country,
the former being born at
Sidon, the latter at Bethlehem,
both in Syria."
He goes on to say, "The
father of Pythagoras, as well
as the father of Jesus,
was prophetically
informed that his wife
should bring forth
a son, who should be a
benefactor to mankind.
They were both born
when their mothers were
from home on journeys,
Joseph and his wife
having gone up to
Bethlehem to be taxed,
and the father of
Pythagoras having
traveled from Samos,
his residence,
to Sidon, about his
mercantile concerns."
Unfortunately, not
everyone appreciated
Pythagoras or his teachings.
Sadly, one of his students
became very disgruntled at him
after he was rejected
as a student,
so that man spread false
rumors about Pythagoras
and turned a mob against him.
And so they murdered
him and his followers,
and burned his school and all
their buildings to the ground.
As you can see, there
are similarities here
between Pythagoras and Jesus.
Not only did he have
disciples, but he
was also known by the same name
titles, such as the Son of God,
and was crucified
in a similar way.
This has caused many
scholars to assume
that perhaps the story of
Jesus might partially be based
on the life of Pythagoras.
Many occultists in
the ancient world
had astonishing insight into
the principles of evolution.
They fully accepted
that all life
is existing in various stages
of growth and becoming,
like that of the
grains of sand, which
are in the course of becoming
human in consciousness,
but not necessarily in form.
In a like manner,
human creatures
were in the process of becoming
planets, and that planets were
in the processes of
becoming solar systems,
and that solar systems were
in the processes of becoming
cosmic chains, and
so on and so forth.
Correspondingly,
one of the stages
between the solar system
and the cosmic chain
was called the zodiac.
Hence, it was taught
that at a certain time,
a solar system breaks
up into a zodiac.
Likewise, the
house of the zodiac
became the thrones for the
12 celestial hierarchies,
or, as certain of the ancients
stated, the 10 divine orders.
Even so, know that the
first 10 numbers were
of particular significance.
Together, these numbers
form the tetractys,
a triangular figure
consisting of 10 points
arranged in 4 rows, 1, 2,
3, and 4 points in each row.
This was also an image of the
formed and the eternal realms.
I have discussed the
tetractys and this subject
at length with best-selling
Lebanese author
and esotericist Karim El Koussa,
who wrote the book "Pythagoras
the Mathemagician."
He told me that in the
first five numbers,
we find a secret
path of initiation,
which are as follows.
We start at one as the
divine force of creation
in the universe, also
known as the Great Monad,
or you could say this is
a sexless, omnipresent,
all-powerful, supreme
force of creation.
The number two-- we
present this as the dyad.
This is the dualistic
principle of the created,
manifested world, the break
of unity, if you will.
The role of the initiate
is thus to escape
the evil deed of the
dyad and the illusion
of the physical
world by embracing
number three, the triad.
This is just like the
Rosicrucian teaching
of the triangle, but it
is through performing
a harmonious balance in this
triune nature of mind, body,
and spirit.
When this successfully
transpires,
the initiate then consciously
enters the realm of number
four, the sacred tetrad, where
the crucifixion of its four
natural elements-- air,
fire, water, and earth--
takes place before ultimately
reaching the resurrection
of its ethereal being into
the sphere of number five,
the pentad.
This symbol is not
only the secret sign
that was used by
the Pythagoreans
to identify themselves
to each other,
but it also symbolized a
reconciliation and concord.
It was later symbolized
by Leonardo da Vinci
in his "Vitruvian Man," because
it represents the human being
with all the elements.
The penta- is also where
you get the pentagram from
or the five-pointed star.
Not only is this the
pattern that Venus moves in,
but I think it's
very fascinating
that the ancients knew that, and
they associated it with Venus.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But the pentagram also
symbolizes the human being,
because it has all of
the elements in it,
with spirit facing up.
Then, when you
move clockwise, we
have water, fire, earth,
and air on its other points.
I do want to add that
in occult traditions,
this symbol has been used
for protection, banishing,
and invocations when drawn
upright from various corners.
However, some associate this
symbol with negative uses
when it has been inverted,
as not only do some groups
superimpose a Baphomet or a
goat-like devil's head over it,
but another way of interpreting
the inverted pentagram
is that you are placing spirit
descending downwards in putting
all the earthly or
material elements first
by this configuration.
We also find the inverted
pentagram and these principles
demonstrated in the Devil
card in the Tarot, as often,
you see that this symbol is
above a man and a woman who
are chained to all the earthly
and material trappings.
But aside from the five numbers
according to Pythagoras,
let us continue on to six, which
was the first perfect number,
representing a state
of health and balance.
Seven represents virginity,
as it cannot be divided by any
other number other than itself.
It brings order to nature.
Eight is associated with
safety and steadfastness,
balancing and regulating
everything in the universe.
Nine brings things to fruition.
Number 10-- Pythagoras
taught that 10, or the deca,
is the greatest of
all numbers, for it
holds the universe
together and manifests
all the laws of nature.
It is also represented
by the Roman numeral
X, which is a cross, meaning
that we graduate from the nine
months of pregnancy into life
when we add another number.
You see, Pythagoras
believed the universe
to be an immense monochord,
as previously mentioned.
He contended that with a
single string connected
to its upper end existed
the absolute spirit,
and at its lower end
was absolute matter.
Strictly speaking,
a cord stretched
between heaven and Earth, like
that of the silver cord, which,
according to the Bible and
reports from astral projectors,
connects us to our astral
selves and physical bodies
if we're out of the body.
By the same token,
Pythagoras contended
that when one counts inward
from the circumference
of the heavens, the universe
is divided into nine parts.
However, others believed
there were to be 12.
In addition, Pythagoras believed
in the doctrine of opposites,
and that the greatest
substances were
both material and
immaterial and are numbered,
which have two different
but complementary facets,
like the physical and the
abstract being individualized
as dyads, or left and
right, or male and female.
Unfortunately, because
Pythagoras initiates
were sworn to
secrecy and nothing
taught was ever written down,
most of the inner workings
of his numbered philosophy were
lost within a few generations
after his demise.
History has determined that
while the early Chinese,
Persians, Hindus, Israelites,
Egyptians, and Greeks
used both vocal and
instrumental music
in their religious
ceremonies, Pythagoras
lifted the art to
its true grandeur
by displaying its
mathematical foundations.
In truth, he is now
praised for his discovery
of the seven-note musical scale
that we use in Western music.
As mentioned
previously, he first
learned the divine
theory of music
from the priests of
the various mystery
schools he had participated in.
Yet, not being
satisfied, Pythagoras
contemplated the laws governing
consonance and dissonance
for quite a few years as well.
He eventually realized that the
vibrations made by the hammers
were all distinct, but
that, except for one,
they were in ideal harmony.
While observing the
fourth and fifth octaves,
he noticed there was a
dissonance between them.
After careful
observation and study,
he found that the tone depended
on the weight of the objects.
These discoveries
eventually led to Pythagoras
being able to cure ailments
of the soul, mind, and body.
He used several specifically
prepared musical compositions
played in the presence of the
sufferer with proven outcomes.
As a result, based on
what we've learned so far,
can you see why Pythagoras was
considered in such high regard?
Indeed, he was a scholar and
a philosopher like no other.
In fact, other great men
merely stand in his shadow.
He lived in a time
of mystery, where
the physical body,
like all of nature,
was considered a marvel
of divine interactions.
He not only studied
it, he lived it.
We know he studied at many
of the great mystery schools
and with the Magi
of Babylon, which
would make him a magician.
Pythagoras was a magician
of the highest order,
and, like all
great magicians, he
attempted to understand nature.
Pythagoras more than likely
used herbs for medicine,
like all magicians did
during that period.
This practice is as
old as time itself.
People who were sick would
go to a magician, who
would make a potion
made of herbal medicine,
much like herbalists do today.
Nevertheless, the first
important area of the Magi
was his ability
to read the stars.
Yes, we know he studied the
heavens, much like Pythagoras
learned in his youth and
performed and perfected
throughout his life.
They studied the
gods and the stars,
two concepts that
were inseparable
from all of the Magi and
Mesopotamian culture.
Without a doubt, magic was
connected to one or the other,
and many times both.
We find that magic
rituals were often
related to the incantation
of the gods, who were likened
to star constellations
seen in the night sky,
including the planets,
like the sun and moon.
It was actually
a matter of faith
that the gods had moved from
the Earth to the heavens
and were indistinguishable
to certain constellations,
planets, or other
phenomena in nature.
These stars were seen
as the intermediaries
between the gods and man.
They were thought to
influence everything,
especially when
asked for favors.
In all actuality,
the stars were even
used to ward off evil
spirits, and were often prayed
to as a result.
Another skill learned by
Pythagoras was plant medicine.
As a matter of
fact, this practice
was widespread in
Mesopotamia as well.
They had access to a
long list of plants,
which gave the
names of the plants,
and how they were to
be primed, and what
illnesses they were to be
used for, and in what way.
Plants could be dispensed
as is or chopped,
ground, used as a potion with
beer or oil, and as a poultice.
Pythagoras was not only an
astronomer, a mathematician,
a philosopher, a student
of the mystery schools
from that time period, but he
was also a Babylonian magician.
And although Pythagoras's life
came to an unfortunate end,
we have him to thank
for the work of Proclus,
Euclid's geometry,
or Plato, who gave us
the Platonic solids, and all
the great Neoplatonic thinkers,
like Plotinus.
Pythagoras was
the first one ever
to call himself a philosopher,
and we will forever
remember him as a great master
who shared his enlightenment
and wisdom with the world.
I'm Jonny Enoch, and thanks for
watching "Mystery Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]